.. _diyplaneconstruction:

======================================
Making your own plane (DIY)
======================================

Those of you which are new to making planes DIY will want some 
more information on the specs given with the electric components, 
and how they can use them to make a working plane.

We'll discuss using the `3Dlabprint Supermarine Spitfire MKXVI <https://3dlabprint.com/shop/spitfire-mk-xvi-s3d-cura-ready/>` and 
rescaling it to 1:18 scale. This will also involve changing the recommended motor and batteries as the weight will be lower.

Let's first take a look at the `specs <https://3dlabprint.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/userguide_Spitfire_MkXVI.pdf>`.
It says the plane is 97,3 cm wide and 80 cm long. So let's assume it's 1:12 scale (it isn't because a real spitfire MKXVI is 
993 cm wide and 960 cm long, so its width/length ratio is off, but let's assume).
Let's say we find it too big, and want it in 1:18 scale.
97,3 cm width by 80 cm length for 1:12 makes
1167,6 cm width by 960 cm length for 1:1 makes
64,8 cm width by 53,3 cm length for 1:18

The 3D model can be changed by means of a 3D modelling program (sketchup, ...)
We can also integrate other features we want then (i.e. a left and right wing that is interlockable into each other and the  
fuselage (so that the wings can be taken off for storage), ...

Next, the engine. 3Dlabprint advises using an AX4008Q 620kV. Let's explain 
`why the kV's are mentioned <http://www.modelairplanenews.com/electric-back-to-basics>` first: this is done as it gives an 
indication of the airplane speed. Without propeller/airplane, it will spin a 620 rpm per volt. More useful specs however are 
the maximum amp (A) and maximum voltage (V) ratings. Multiply them and you get the maximum power output (watts).
For the AX4008Q, that's 570 watts (19V x 30A). Since the airplane weighs 840g, that means it has 655 watt/kg 
(1000/840= 1,15 x 570 watt = 655. That's way above the 67-94,5 watt/kg the airplane needs (see 
`"input watts per pound guidelines" <http://www.modelairplanenews.com/electric-back-to-basics>`).

For our plane, let's assume the weight will be 100g lighter, or 740g.
1000/740= 1,35 x 94,5 watts = 128 watts. There are 30% energy losses, so we need an engine that can output 
166,4 watts (128 x 1,3). Let's say we'll use a 2P3S LiPo battery. The nominal voltage of a LiPo is 3,7V so 
3S x3,7V = 11,1V Let's say the batteries have 1250 mAh (=1,25 Ah). 2P3S batteries thus have 2,5 Ah (1,25 Ah x 2).
At a voltage of 11,1 V the Wh rating is 27,75 Wh. So, with a 166 watt engine, the plane can run for 10 minutes 
at full power (166/27,75= 5,98 & 60 mins / 5,98 = 10 mins ). If we want to be able to fly longer before needing 
to recharge (say 20 mins or well slighly less since the airplane weight will increase too), we should fit 4P3S batteries. 
We can also calculte the c-rate. For the 166 watt engine, 14,95 A is requested at 11,1V. 
That's a c-rate of 5,98 (2,5 A = 1C so 14,95 A is 5,98 C). A c-rate of 5,98 is easily providable by the battery 
(LiPo's can easily provide upto 20C or more). Next, the electronic speed control (ESC). 
This needs to be 20% higher than the amps the motor needs at full power. 
For our engine that's 14,95 A, so 14,95A x 1,2 = 17,94 A. So a 20A ESC is suitable.

For the forward and/or downward facing camera's and remote control device, we can select between a range of different 
frequencies (900 mhz, 1200 mhz, 2400 mhz, 5800 mhz. The frequency suitable for your application can be selected using 
`the info on this page <https://www.flitetest.com/articles/FPV_frequencies_for_dummies>`. Camera's can also be made to 
record on flash-media rather than streaming it live.

Then, the propeller. Engine manufacturers list a figure such as 9" x 6" with their engine docs. That means 9 inch diameter 
and 6 inch pitch. 6 inch pitch means the airplane travels 6 inch per propeller revolution. If there's no such info, use a 
"propeller size chart". It's best to use a 2-bladed propeller if possible, as these create less turbulence and are thus more 
efficient than  multiple-bladed propellers.
