.. _extended-kalman-filter:

=====================================================
Extended Kalman Filter Navigation Overview and Tuning
=====================================================

This article describes the Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) algorithm used
by Copter and Plane to estimate vehicle position, velocity and angular
orientation based on rate gyroscopes, accelerometer, compass
(magnetometer), GPS, airspeed and barometric pressure measurements. It
includes both an overview of the algorithm and information about the
available tuning parameters.

Overview
========

The availability of faster processors (like the one on Pixhawk) have
enabled more advanced mathematical algorithms to be implemented to
estimate the orientation, velocity and position of the flight vehicle.
An Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) algorithm has been developed that uses
rate gyroscopes, accelerometer, compass, GPS, airspeed and barometric
pressure measurements to estimate the position, velocity and angular
orientation of the flight vehicle. This algorithm is implemented in the
**AP_NavEKF** library and is based on initial work documented here:
https://github.com/priseborough/InertialNav

PX4 and Pixhawk users can use this algorithm instead of the legacy
complementary filters by setting ``AHRS_EKF_USE = 1``.

.. warning::

   **IMPORTANT:** Do not set ``AHRS_EKF_USE = 1`` unless you have
   performed an Accel and compass calibration. Failure to do so may result
   in an erratic flight path due to bad sensor data.

The advantage of the EKF over the simpler complementary filter
algorithms used by DCM and Copters Inertial Nav, is that by fusing all
available measurements it is better able to reject measurements with
significant errors so that the vehicle becomes less susceptible to
faults that affect a single sensor.

Another feature of the EKF algorithm is that it is able to estimate
offsets in the vehicles compass readings and also estimate the earth's
magnetic field for both plane, copter and rover applications. This makes
it less sensitive to compass calibration errors than current DCM and
INAV algorithms.

It also enables measurements from optional sensors such as optical flow
and laser range finders to be used to assist navigation.

Theory
======

The EKF (Extended Kalman Filter) algorithm implemented, estimates a
total of 22 states with the underlying equations derived using the
following:
https://github.com/priseborough/InertialNav/blob/master/derivations/GenerateEquations22states.m

The following is a greatly simplified non-mathematical description of
how the filter works:

#. IMU angular rates are integrated to calculate the angular position
#. IMU accelerations are converted using the angular position from body
   X,Y,Z to earth North,East and Down axes and corrected for gravity
#. Accelerations are integrated to calculate the velocity
#. Velocity is integrated to calculate the position

   This process from 1) to 4) is referred to as 'State Prediction'. A
   'state' is a variables we are trying to estimate like roll,pitch yaw,
   height, wind speed, etc. The filter has other states besides
   position, velocity and angles that are assumed to change slowly.
   These include gyro biases, Z accelerometer bias, wind velocities,
   compass biases and the earth's magnetic field. These other states
   aren't modified directly by the 'State Prediction' step but can be
   modified by measurements a described later.
#. Estimated gyro and accelerometer noise (``EKF_GYRO_NOISE``
   and ``EKF_ACC_NOISE``) are used to estimate the growth in error in
   the angles, velocities and position calculated using IMU data. Making
   these parameters larger causes the filters error estimate to grow
   faster. If no corrections are made using other measurements (eg GPS),
   this error estimate will continue to grow. These estimated errors are
   captured in a large matrix called the 'State Covariance Matrix'.

   Steps 1) to 5) are repeated every time we get new IMU data until a
   new measurement from another sensor is available.

   If we had a perfect initial estimate, perfect IMU measurements and
   perfect calculations, then we could keep repeating 1) to 4)
   throughout the flight with no other calculations required. However,
   errors in the initial values, errors in the IMU measurements and
   rounding errors in our calculations mean that we can only go for a
   few seconds before the velocity and position errors become too large.

   The Extended Kalman Filter algorithm provides us with a way of
   combining or fusing data from the IMU, GPS, compass, airspeed,
   barometer and other sensors to calculate a more accurate and reliable
   estimate of our position, velocity and angular orientation.

   The following example describes how GPS horizontal position
   measurements are used, however the same principal applies to other
   measurement types (barometric altitude, GPS velocity, etc)

#. When a GPS measurement arrives, the filter calculates the difference
   between the predicted position from 4) and the position from the GPS.
   This difference is called an 'Innovation'.
#. The 'Innovation' from 6), 'State Covariance Matrix' from 5), and the
   GPS measurement error specified by ``EKF_POSNE_NOISE`` are combined
   to calculate a correction to each of the filter states. This is
   referred to as a 'State Correction'.

   This is the clever part of the a Kalman Filter, as it is able to use
   knowledge of the correlation between different errors and different
   states to correct states other than the one being measured. For
   example GPS position measurements are able to correct errors in
   position, velocity, angles and gyro bias.

   The amount of correction is controlled by the assumed ratio of the
   error in the states to the error in the measurements. This means if
   the filter thinks its own calculated position is more accurate than
   the GPS measurement, then the correction from the GPS measurement
   will be smaller. If it thinks its own calculated position is less
   accurate than the GPS measurement, then the correction from the GPS
   measurement will be larger. The assumed accuracy of the GPS
   measurement is controlled by the ``EKF_POSNE_NOISE``, parameter.
   Making ``EKF_POSNE_NOISE`` larger causes the filter to think the
   GPS position is less accurate.

#. Because we have now taken a measurement, the amount of uncertainty in
   each of the states that have been updated is reduced. The filter
   calculates the reduction in uncertainty due to the 'State
   Correction', updates the 'State Covariance Matrix' and returns to
   step 1)

Tuning Parameters
=================

.. _extended-kalman-filter_ahrs_ekf_use:

AHRS_EKF_USE
--------------

This should be set to 1 to enable use of the filter, or set to 0 to use
the legacy algorithms. Be aware that both algorithms are running
regardless of this parameter, and all the EKF data will be logged
regardless, provided full rate AHRS data logging is enabled.

From Copter3.3 onwards the EKF has been enabled by default and this
parameter is not available. Plane and Rover users can still elect to use
the legacy algorithms.

EKF_ABIAS_PNOISE
------------------

This noise controls the growth of the vertical accelerometer bias state
error estimate. Increasing it makes accelerometer bias estimation faster
and noisier.

EKF_ACC_PNOISE
----------------

This noise controls the growth of estimated error due to accelerometer
measurement errors excluding bias. Increasing it makes the flter trust
the accelerometer measurements less and other measurements more.

.. _extended-kalman-filter_ekf_alt_noise:

EKF_ALT_NOISE
---------------

This is the RMS value of noise in the altitude measurement. If you
increase this parameter, the filter will think the barometer is more
noisy and will place less weighting on its measurements.

If this parameter is set too small, then the filter will constantly
react to noise in the barometer measurement which will cause the filter
height to be noisy. In copters this will cause the copter to jiggle up
and down during altitude hold.

If this parameter is set too high, then the height will tend to wander
more and will be more susceptible to GPS vertical velocity glitches.

See the section on interpreting EKF3 log data for more information on
using log data to help set this parameter.

EKF_ALT_SOURCE
----------------

This parameter controls which measurement source is used to determine
height during optical flow navigation. Set to 0 to use the barometer or
to 1 to use the range finder. If set to 1,the vehicle will attempt to
maintain a constant height relative to the terrain, which is the default
behaviour during optical flow navigation. 
Warning : EK2_ALT_SOURCE = 1 is only suitable for low altitude and 
low speed operation over flat surfaces, not for up and away flight. 
To use range finder at lower altitudes and barometer for up and away flight, 
set EK2_ALT_SOURCE = 0 and use the RNG_USE_HGT parameter.

EKF_EAS_GATE
--------------

This parameter scales the threshold used for the airspeed measurement
innovation consistency check. Decreasing it makes it more likely that
good measurements will be rejected. Increasing it makes it more likely
that bad measurements will be accepted. It is scaled in units of
standard deviation. For example a setting of 3 means that differences
greater than than 3 x the assumed standard deviation will cause the
measurement to be rejected.

EKF_EAS_NOISE
---------------

This is the RMS value of noise in compass measurements. Increasing it
reduces the weighting on these measurements. See the section on
interpreting EKF3 log data for more information on using log data to
help set this parameter. See the section on interpreting EKF3 log data
for more information on using log data to help set this parameter.

EKF_FALLBACK
-------------

This parameter controls whether inconsistency in sensor data can cause a
fallback to DCM. If set to 0, then detection of inconsistent sensor
cannot cause a fallback. If set to 1, then large inconsistencies in data
will result a fallback to DCM if available.

EKF_FLOW_DELAY
----------------

This is the number of msec that the optical flow rate measurements lag
behind the IMU measurements.

EKF_FLOW_GATE
---------------

This parameter controls the maximum amount of difference in between the
measured optical flow rates and the predicted rates before the EKF
starts to reject the measurements. Reducing this parameter makes it more
likely that valid optical flow rate measurements will be rejected.
Increasing this parameter makes it more likely that invalid optical flow
rate measurements will be accepted. It is scaled in units of standard
deviation. For example a setting of 3 means that differences greater
than than 3 x the assumed standard deviation will cause the measurement
to be rejected.

EKF_FLOW_NOISE
----------------

This parameter allows for optical flow rate measurement errors and
noise. It represents the expected RMS error in rad/sec. If set too large
the position will drift more. If set too small the position and velocity
output from the EKF will become noisy and there is a risk that the EKF
could start rejecting optical flow measurements during manoeuvres.

EKF_GBIAS_PNOISE
------------------

This noise controls the growth of gyro bias state error estimates.
Increasing it makes rate gyro bias estimation faster and noisier.

EKF_GLITCH_ACCEL
------------------

This parameter controls the maximum amount of difference in horizontal
acceleration (in cm/s^2) between the value predicted by the filter and
the value measured by the GPS, before the GPS position measurement is
rejected. If this value is set too low, then valid GPS data will be
regularly discarded, and the position accuracy will degrade. If this
parameter is set too high, then GPS glitches can cause large rapid
changes in position.

EKF_GLITCH_RAD
----------------

This parameter controls the maximum amount of difference in horizontal
position (in m) between the value predicted by the filter and the value
measured by the GPS, before the long term glitch protection logic is
activated and an offset is applied to the GPS measurement to compensate.
Position jumps smaller than this parameter will be temporarily ignored,
but if they persist will then be accepted and the filter will move to
the new position. Position steps larger than this value, will also be
ignored initially, but if they persist, the GPS position measurement
will be corrected by the amount of the step before being used. This
prevents a large step change in position. This correction is decayed
back to zero at a constant rate so that the new GPS position will be
realised gradually. The value of this correction in the north and east
directions can be checked by plotting the EKF4.OFN and EKF4.OFE flashlog
data.

EKF_GND_GRADIENT
------------------

This parameter controls the amount of terrain gradient in % that is
assumed when fusing range finder data and influences how rapidly the
estimated terrain height responds to changes in measurement. This can be
increased when operating over uneven terrain to allow the terrain
estimate to change more rapidly.

.. _extended-kalman-filter_ekf_gps_type:

EKF_GPS_TYPE
--------------

This parameter controls use of GPS velocity measurements : 0 = use 3D
velocity, 1 = use 2D velocity, 2 = use no velocity

EKF_GYRO_PNOISE
-----------------

This noise controls the growth of estimated error due to gyro
measurement errors excluding bias. Increasing it makes the filter trust
the gyro measurements less and other measurements more.

EKF_HGT_GATE
--------------

This parameter scales the threshold used for the height measurement
innovation consistency check. Decreasing it makes it more likely that
good measurements will be rejected. Increasing it makes it more likely
that bad measurements will be accepted.

EKF_MAGB_PNOISE
-----------------

This noise controls the growth of body magnetic field state error
estimates. Increasing it makes compass offset estimation faster and
noisier.

EKF_MAGE_PNOISE
-----------------

This noise controls the growth of earth magnetic field state error
estimates. Increasing it makes earth magnetic field bias estimation
faster and noisier.

EKF_MAG_CAL
-------------

The EKF is capable of learning magnetometer offsets in-flight. This
parameter controls when the learning is active:

-  ``EKF_MAG_CAL = 0``: Learning is enabled when speed and height
   indicate the vehicle is airborne
-  ``EKF_MAG_CAL = 1``: Learning is enabled when the vehicle is
   manoeuvring
-  ``EKF_MAG_CAL = 2``: Learning is disabled
-  ``EKF_MAG_CAL = 3``: Learning is enabled when the vehicle is armed

EKF_MAG_GATE
--------------

This parameter scales the threshold used for the magnetometer
measurement innovation consistency check. Decreasing it makes it more
likely that good measurements will be rejected. Increasing it makes it
more likely that bad measurements will be accepted. It is scaled in
units of standard deviation. For example a setting of 3 means that
differences greater than than 3 x the assumed standard deviation will
cause the measurement to be rejected.

EKF_MAG_NOISE
---------------

This is the RMS value of noise in magnetometer measurements / 1000. The
magnetometer readings are scaled by 1/1000 before they are used by the
filter to reduce the effect of numerical rounding errors. Increasing
this noise parameter reduces the weighting on magnetometer measurements.
This would make the filter yaw less affected less by magnetometer
errors, but more affected by Z gyro drift. See the section on
interpreting EKF3 log data for more information on using log data to
help set this parameter.

EKF_MAX_FLOW
--------------

This parameter controls the maximum amount of optical flow rate (in
rad/sec) that will be accepted as a valid measurement by the EKF. This
helps to reject measurements corrupted during data transfer or when the
flow sensor is unable to keep up with the motion of the vehicle.

EKF_POS_DELAY
---------------

This is the number of msec that the GPS position measurements lag behind
the inertial measurements.

EKF_POSNE_NOISE
-----------------

This is the RMS value of noise in the GPS horizontal position
measurements. If you increase this parameter, the filter will think the
GPS is more noisy and will place less weighting on the horizontal GPS
velocity measurements.

If this parameter is set to small, then the filter will constantly react
to noise in the GPS position which can cause continual and rapid small
attitude and position changes in copters during loiter.

If this parameter is set to large, then the inertial sensor errors will
cause the filter position to wander slowly as errors in the inertial
calculations are not corrected enough by the GPS. This can cause
excessive wander in position for copters during loiter.

See the section on interpreting EKF3 log data for more information on
using log data to help set this parameter.

EKF_POS_GATE
--------------

This parameter scales the threshold used for the GPS position
measurement innovation consistency check. Decreasing it makes it more
likely that good measurements will be rejected. Increasing it makes it
more likely that bad measurements will be accepted. It is scaled in
units of standard deviation. For example a setting of 3 means that
differences greater than than 3 x the assumed standard deviation will
cause the measurement to be rejected.

EKF_RNG_GATE
--------------

This parameter controls the maximum amount of difference in between the
measured range to ground and the predicted range before the EKF starts
to reject the measurements. Reducing this parameter makes it more likely
that valid range finder measurements will be rejected. Increasing this
parameter makes it more likely that invalid range finder measurements
will be accepted. It is scaled in units of standard deviation. For
example a setting of 3 means that differences greater than than 3 x the
assumed standard deviation will cause the measurement to be rejected.

EKF_VELD_NOISE
----------------

This is the RMS value of noise in the vertical GPS velocity measurement
in m/s. If you increase this parameter, the filter will think the GPS is
more noisy and will place less weighting on the vertical GPS velocity
measurements.

If this parameter is set too small, then the filter will constantly
react to noise in the GPS measurement which will cause the filter height
to be noisy. In copters this will cause the copter to jiggle up and down.

If this parameter is set too high then the filter will be not take full
advantage of the GPS velocity information, and will be more susceptible
to Barometer height glitches.

See the section on interpreting EKF3 log data for more information on
using log data to help set this parameter.

EKF_VELNE_NOISE
-----------------

This is the RMS value of noise in the North and East GPS velocity
measurements in m/s. If you increase this parameter, the filter will
think the GPS is more noisy and will place less weighting on the
horizontal GPS velocity measurements.

If this parameter is set too small, then the filter will constantly
react to noise in the GPS measurement which will cause the filter roll
and pitch angles to be noisy. If you have the vehicle outside with a
clear view of the sky and away from buildings and other large objects,
then the HUD in mission planer should be steady. If it is moving around
noticeably, then it is likely the GPS noise is too high for the filter
setting. This will also result in continual and rapid small angle and
position changes in copters during loiter.

If this parameter is set too high then the filter will be not take full
advantage of the GPS velocity information, will wander more in position
and will be more susceptible to GPS position glitches.

See the section on interpreting EKF3 log data for more information on
using log data to help set this parameter.

EKF_VEL_DELAY
---------------

This is the number of msec that the GPS velocity measurements lag behind
the inertial measurements.

EKF_VEL_GATE
--------------

This parameter scales the threshold used for the GPS velocity
measurement innovation consistency check. Decreasing it makes it more
likely that good measurements will be rejected. Increasing it makes it
more likely that bad measurements will be accepted. It is scaled in
units of standard deviation. For example a setting of 3 means that
differences greater than than 3 x the assumed standard deviation will
cause the measurement to be rejected.

EKF_WIND_PNOISE
-----------------

This noise controls the growth of wind state error estimates. Increasing
it makes wind estimation faster and noisier.

EKF_WIND_PSCALE
-----------------

Increasing this parameter increases how rapidly the wind states adapt
when changing altitude, but does make wind speed estimation noisier.

.. _extended-kalman-filter_interpreting_log_data:

Interpreting Log Data
=====================

Correct tuning the Navigation filter is not possible without some
analysis of the data logged by the filter in the flash logs. To log this
data, it is important that AHRS data logging is enabled. The EKF data is
contained in the EKF1, EKF2, EKF3 and EKF4 log messages. This section
describes the meaning of the various EKF log data and shows examples
obtained from plotting data using the Mission Planner DataFlash log
review feature.

EKF1
----

**TimeMS** - time in msec from startup

**Roll** - Roll angle (deg)

**Pitch** - Pitch angle (deg)

**Yaw** - Yaw angle (deg)

**VN,VE,VD** - North,East,Down velocities (m/s)

**PN,PE,PD** - North,East,Down positions (m) relative to where the
vehicle was armed

**GX,GY,GZ** - X,Y,Z Gyro biases (deg/min)

The following figure shows the gyro biases from a plane with a Pixhawk
controller. The gyro biases can be seen to vary at the start and
stabilise about new values as the sensor warms up and reaches its
operating temperature. The cheap MEMS inertial sensors used by our
controllers can have significant bias variation with temperature.

.. image:: ../images/GXYZ.jpg
    :target: ../_images/GXYZ.jpg

EKF2
----

**TimeMS** - time in msec from startup.

**Ratio** - Weighting percentage of the IMU1 accelerometer data used in
the blending of IMU1 and IMU2 data. If two IMU's are available with your
hardware (eg Pixhawk), then this will normally fluctuate rapidly in the
50% region as seen here.

.. image:: ../images/normalAX.jpg
    :target: ../_images/normalAX.jpg

If it swings close to 100 or 0 % for parts of the flight, then this
indicates that you likely have aliasing affecting your accelerometer
data and you should look for solutions to reduce this (eg vibration
isolation mounts for your autopilot).

**AZ1bias** - Z accelerometer bias for IMU1 (cm/s:sup:`2`)

**AZ2bias** - Z accelerometer bias for IMU2 (cm/s:sup:`2`)

**VWN,VWE** - North and East wind velocity (m/s). A positive value means
the wind is moving in the direction of that axis, eg a positive North
wind velocity is blowing from the South.

**MN,ME,MD** - North, East, Down earth magnetic field strength (sensor
units). If you are flying quickly, or are at low speed with
``EKF_MAG_CAL`` enabled, these will slowly change during flight as the
filter 'learns' the earth's magnetic field.

.. image:: ../images/MagNED.jpg
    :target: ../_images/MagNED.jpg

**MX,MY,MZ** - X, Y, Z body magnetic field biases (sensor units). If you
are flying quickly, or are at low speed with ``EKF_MAG_CAL`` enabled,
these will slowly change during flight as the filter 'learns' the
earth's magnetic field. These have the same meaning as the compass
offsets, but are the opposite sign (eg in the following figure MX
stabilises at a value of +35, indicating that a ``COMPASS_OFS_X`` value
of -35 should be used.

.. image:: ../images/MagXYZ.jpg
    :target: ../_images/MagXYZ.jpg

EKF3
----

This message contains the innovations for each sensor (GPS, barometer,
magnetometer and airspeed). Innovations are the difference between the
value predicted using the IMU data before corrections are applied, and
the value measured by the sensor.

**TimeMS** - Time in msec from startup

**IVN,IVE,IVD** - Innovations for the North,East,Down GPS velocity
measurements (m/s). These are an important measure of health for the
navigation filter. If you have god quality IMU and GPS data they will be
small and around zero as shown in the following figure:

.. image:: ../images/VelInnov.jpg
    :target: ../_images/VelInnov.jpg

The noise level on these innovations when the vehicle is not maneuvering
can be used to set the value of ``EKF_VELNE_NOISE`` and
``EKF_VELD_NOISE``. For example in the above figure, the velocity noise
when the vehicle was non-manoeuvring was around +-0.3 m/s for both the
North,East and Down velocities. This means that a good starting value
for \ ``EKF_VELNE_NOISE`` and ``EKF_VELD_NOISE`` for this example would
be 0.3 m/s.

**IPN,IPE** - Innovations in the North, East GPS position measurements
(m). Similarly to the velocity innovations, they should be small and
centred on zero as in the following example:

.. image:: ../images/PosInnov.jpg
    :target: ../_images/PosInnov.jpg

The noise levels on these innovations can be used to set the value of
``EKF_POSNE_NOISE``. In the above figure, the noise sits within a band
of +-0.5m, so a good starting value for the value of ``EKF_POSNE_NOISE``
in this example would be 0.5m.

**IPD** - Innovations on the barometer height measurement (m). They
should be small and centered on zero as in the following example,
although transients of around 2m are common when sudden height changes
or manoeuvres are performed due to IMU errors, sensor lag and the effect
of changes in airflow on he barometer reading.

.. image:: ../images/PosDInnov.jpg
    :target: ../_images/PosDInnov.jpg

In the above figure it can be seen that there is a small 1m negative
offset that is removed after 2min. This is due to bias errors on the Z
accelerometers which take time to be learned by the filter and
compensated for. In this example, the underlying sensor noise is low at
about +-0.15m, which indicates a good starting value for
``EKF_ALT_NOISE`` for plane applications would be 0.15m.

Note: For copter, experience has shown the value of
``EKF_ALT_NOISE`` normally has to be increased above the theoretical
value to smooth out the height response

**IMX,IMY,IMZ** - Innovations for the Magnetometer X,Y,Z measurements.
These should be centered around zero and not exceed +- 50 during
manoeuvres as shown in the following figure:

.. image:: ../images/MagInnov.jpg
    :target: ../_images/MagInnov.jpg

In the above example ``EKF_MAG_CAL`` was set to 1, so the copter quickly
learnt the magnetometer biases (compass offsets). Although the
underlying noise of the magnetometer is relatively low (5 or less in
most cases), there are other errors due to differences in scale factors
between axes, magnetometer misalignment, and varying magnetic fields
produced by electrical power systems that cause larger errors. Typically
these result in sharp transients of about 50 in the innovations, as can
be seen in the above figure. For this reason the default value of
``EKF_MAG_NOISE`` is set to 0.05 (which represents a noise of 50 in
sensor units).

The following figure is taken from a slow speed copter flight with a bad
magnetometer calibration and ``EKF_MAG_CAL`` = 0. The innovations vary
noticeably as the vehicle changes its orientation.

.. image:: ../images/BadMagInnov1.jpg
    :target: ../_images/BadMagInnov1.jpg

**IVT** - Innovation for the true airspeed measurement (m/s). This will
be zero if the airspeed sensor is not fitted or is not being used (e.g. on
ground). It should be centered around zero if the airspeed sensor is
calibrated correctly, but will vary in noise level depending on how
gusty the flight conditions are. the following is an example from a
flight with a well calibrated airspeed sensor in moderate wind
conditions of around 7m/s in low turbulence:

.. image:: ../images/ekf_innovation_for_true_airspeed.jpg
    :target: ../_images/ekf_innovation_for_true_airspeed.jpg

A constant offset of 1m/s from zero would indicate a steady 1m/s
airspeed error. Steady airspeed errors can be caused if the airspeed
sensor is uncovered during initialisation on a windy day resulting in a
significant pressure offset, is out of cal, or has experienced a large
change in temperature since initialisation.

This figure can also be used to set the value for ``EKF_EAS_NOISE``. For
the example shown above, the total noise (including gusts) is around 1.4
m/s, so this would be a good starting value for ``EKF_EAS_NOISE``.

EKF4
----

This message contains plots showing how each sensor is performing
relative to the error gates set by the ``EKF_POS_GATE``,
``EKF_VEL_GATE``, ``EKF_HGT_GATE``, ``EKF_MAG_GATE`` and
``EKF_EAS_GATE``. These parameters control how inconsistent a
measurement is allowed to be before the filter won't use it. When we
refer to inconsistency of measurements in this section, we are talking
about the amount of difference between the measurement predicted by the
filter and the measurement taken by the sensor. Checking measurements
for inconsistencies is particularly important with GPS, because GPS
measurements can have very large transient position and velocity errors
that would cause a crash if they were to be used by the filter. The
following messages are available in EKF4:

**TimeMS** - Time in msec from startup

**SV** - ratio of the combined GPS velocity inconsistency to the limit
set by the ``EKF_VEL_GATE`` parameter. For a flight with good GPS data,
this can have the occasional spike to over 1/2, but should never go
above 1. If this line goes above 1, then it indicates that the filter
stopped using the GPS velocity data for that period in flight. This
should never happen with good sensor data. The following figure shows
**SV** taken from a quadrotor flight with 9 to 10 satellites in good GPS
conditions, using the default parameters. If this line is too high and
goes above 1 with good GPS, then the ``EKF_VEL_GATE`` parameter should
be increased.

.. image:: ../images/normalised-gps-velocity-error.jpg
    :target: ../_images/normalised-gps-velocity-error.jpg

**SP** - ratio of the GPS total position inconsistency to the limit set
by the ``EKF_POS_GATE`` parameter. For a flight with good GPS data, this
can have the occasional spike to over 1/2, but should never go above 1.
If this line goes above 1, then it indicates that the filter stopped
using the GPS position data for that period in flight. This should never
happen with good sensor data. The following figure shows **SP** taken
from a quadrotor flight with 9 to 10 satellites in good GPS conditions,
using the default parameters. If this line is too high and goes above 1
with good GPS, then the ``EKF_POS_GATE`` parameter should be
increased.

.. image:: ../images/normalised-gps-position-error.jpg
    :target: ../_images/normalised-gps-position-error.jpg

**SH** - ratio of the barometer height inconsistency to the limit set by
the ``EKF_HGT_GATE`` parameter. This can have the occasional spike to
over 1/2, but should never go above 1. If this line goes above 1, then
it indicates that the filter stopped using the barometer data for that
period in flight. This should never happen with good sensor data. The
following figure shows **SH** taken from a quadrotor flight at airspeeds
up to 16 m/s, using the default parameters. If this line is too high and
goes above 1, then the``EKF_HGT_GATE`` parameter should be increased.
Factors that can cause this to be high include airflow past the
autopilot affecting the barometer reading and accelerometer errors due
to sensor drift or aliasing.

.. image:: ../images/normalised-baro-alt-error.jpg
    :target: ../_images/normalised-baro-alt-error.jpg

**SMX,SMY,SMZ** - ratio of the magnetometer X,Y and Z measurement
inconsistencies to the limit set by the ``EKF_MAG_GATE`` parameter. This
can have the occasional spike to over 1/2, but should never go above 1.
If this line goes above 1, then it indicates that the filter stopped
using that component of magnetometer data for that period in flight.
This should never happen with good sensor data. The following figure
shows the SMX, SMY and SMZ data taken from a quadrotor flight using the
default parameters. If this line is too high and goes above 1 on a
regular basis, then it indicates a problem with the compass calibration
or installation. It is recommended that the reasons for the compass
errors be investigated first before resorting to increasing
the ``EKF_MAG_GATE`` parameter.

.. image:: ../images/normalised-magnetometer-errors.jpg
    :target: ../_images/normalised-magnetometer-errors.jpg

The next figure shows **SMX**, **SMY** and **SMZ** taken from a rover
log, with the throttle demand **ThrOutR** also plotted.

.. image:: ../images/roverMagSpikes.jpg
    :target: ../_images/roverMagSpikes.jpg

The large spikes above 1 every time the throttle steps up, and the large
values during throttle operation can be clearly seen. In this example it
would be recommended that steps be taken to reduce the amount of compass
interference

**SVT** - ratio of the airspeed measurement inconsistency to the limit
set by the ``EKF_EAS_GATE`` parameter. This can have the occasional
spike to over 1/2, but should rarely go above 1. If this line goes above
1, then it indicates that the filter stopped using the airspeed data for
that period in flight. Factors that can cause this to be high include
airspeed calibration errors, the presence of strong gusts and
turbulence, and rapid changes in wind speed. It is normal for this to be
higher at the start of the flight before the filter has estimated the
wind velocity.

.. image:: ../images/SVT.png
    :target: ../_images/SVT.png
