.. _mission-planner-initial-setup:

=============================
Mission Planner Initial Setup
=============================

DRAFT

This section of Mission Planner, invoked by the Menu item Initial Setup
at the top of Mission Planner, has several subsections. The subsection
are where you set up and configure you auto pilot to prepare it for your
particular vehicle. Typically these sections are "must do" actions that
are required.

What you see when you enter this section depends on whether or not you
are connected. Each menu item will bring up a new screen, each is
discussed below with links to more detail.

Install Firmware
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will see this menu item If the auto pilot is Not connected. If you
have a new auto pilot or if you want to update the control software that
resides in you autopilot, you must install (upload) the
:ref:`firmware <common-glossary>` into it. Before you jump to the
details for your auto pilot some basic information is important

Add words about where is the firmware, must have internet connection,
how do you select the right version, beta version, what are the funny
numbers you see in previous revisions - click one and you will see all
the versions under each vehicle icon. .

Here are the details for each auto pilot: :ref:`Install Firmware <common-loading-firmware-onto-pixhawk>`

3DR Radio
~~~~~~~~~

You will see this menu item If the auto pilot is Not connected.  Here is
what you can do in this section  TBD

Antenna Tracker
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will see this menu item If the auto pilot is Not connected.  Here is
what you can do in this section TBD

Mandatory Hardware
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will see this menu item If the auto pilot IS connected.  Click this
menu item to see the items you must complete before you attempt to
operate your vehicle.  Specifics are located in the area of the web that
covers you specific vehicle (Copter, Plane, Rover)

Here is what you can do in this section (TBD just an overview)

Optional Hardware
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will see this menu item If the auto pilot IS connected.  Click this
menu item to see the items you may want to complete before you attempt
to operate your vehicle.  Specifics are located in the area of the web
that covers you specific vehicle (Copter, Plane, Rover)

Here is what you can do in this section (TBD just an overview)
