.. _mission-planner-configuration-and-tuning:

========================================
Mission Planner Configuration and Tuning
========================================

The `APM Forum <https://discuss.ardupilot.org/>`__ permits
developers to respond to your questions and enables you to research
similar issues, Please choose the sub-forum that is most appropriate to
the wiki page and issues you are having.

.. note:: DRAFT

This section of Mission Planner, invoked by the Menu item Config/Tuning
at the top of Mission Planner, has several subsections. The subsection
are where you configure the parameters that control how your auto pilot
controls your vehicle. Tuning refers to adjusting parameters in the
control loops so your vehicle behaves the way you desire. Most of these
parameters are set for you when you first install your firmware but some
must be set before your first flight or roaming adventure.

What you see when you enter this section depends on whether or not you
are connected. Each menu item will bring up a new screen, each is
discussed below with links to more detail.

Planner
=======

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot IS or Is Not connected.
This is where you set up most of the options for how the Mission Planner
works. Such things and enabling speach, where the logs are saved, the
units of measure you want to use, ETC.  Some of the specifics are
covered here.  (TBD Add details or links to other pages with details.
What is each of the entries for, what does it effect, TBD

Basic Pids
==========

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot Is connected.  Here is
what you can do in this section  TBD

Flight Modes
============

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot Is connected.  Here is
what you can do in this section  TBD

Introduction,  how to set up 6 channel  - add a link   etc.

Standard Params
===============

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot Is connected.  Here is
what you can do in this section  TBD

GeoFence
========

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot Is connected.  Here is
what you can do in this section  TBD

FailSafe
========

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot Is connected.  Here is
what you can do in this section  TBD

Advanced Params
===============

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot Is connected.  Here is
what you can do in this section  TBD

Full Parameter List
===================

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot Is connected.

Here is what you can do in this section  TBD

Options on the right hand side of this screen:  You can save the
parameters for your vehicle. It is a good idea to do that often.  Also,
you can reload all your parameters from a saved file.  You can also
compare the parameters in your vehicle to those in a saved file. This is
a very valuable feature in case you forget what you changed or if your
vehicle behaves badly after a change but you don't remember the previous
value(s) of the parameters you changed - or even what you changed. An
important aspect of the compare feature: After you select the file with
the save parameters you want to compare, you will get a window that
lists every parameter that is different. At the time of the window,
nothing has been changed, but if you check some items and then click
Continue, those items will be changed in the local memory of Mission
Planner. You will then need to click the Write Params parameters button
in the right hand panel to copy the changes to the memory in your auto
pilot.

Until we get more words here, just experiment.

Clean this up with the right menu words,  Load, Save Refres Parms etc.

Copter Pids
===========

You will see this menu item if the auto pilot Is connected to an
AruCopter.   Here is what you can do in this section  TBD
